federalist 66
objections to the power of the senate to
set as a court for impeachments further
considered
from the new york packet tuesday march
11 1788
hamilton to the people of the state of
new york
a review of the principal objections
that have appeared against the proposed
court for the trial of impeachments will
not improbably eradicate the remains of
any unfavorable impressions which may
still exist in regard to this matter the
first of these objections is that the
provision in question confounds
legislative and judiciary authorities in
the same body in violation of that
important and well-established maxim
which requires a separation between the
different departments of power
the true meaning of this maxim has been
discussed and ascertained in another
place and has been shown to be entirely
compatible with a partial intermixture
of those departments for special
purposes preserving them in the main
distinct and unconnected
this partial intermixture is even in
some cases not only proper but necessary
to the mutual defense of the several
members of the government against each
other
an absolute or qualified negative in the
executive upon the acts of the
legislative body is admitted by the
ableist adepts in political science to
be an indispensable barrier against the
encroachments of the latter upon the
former and it may perhaps with no less
reason be contended that the powers
relating to impeachments are as before
intimated an essential check in the
hands of that body upon the
encroachments of the executive
the division of them between the two
branches of the legislature assigning to
one the right of accusing to the other
the right of judging avoids the
inconvenience of making the same persons
both accusers and judges and guards
against the danger of persecution from
the prevalency of a factious spirit in
either of those branches
as the concurrence of two-thirds of the
senate will be requisite to a
condemnation the security to innocence
from this additional circumstance will
be as complete as itself can desire
it is curious to observe with what
vehemence this part of the plan is
assailed on the principle here taken
notice of by men who profess to admire
without exception the constitution of
this state while that constitution makes
the senate together with the chancellor
and judges of the supreme court not only
a court of impeachment but the highest
judicatory in the state in all causes
civil and criminal
the proportion in point of numbers of
the chancellor and judges to the
senators is so inconsiderable that the
judiciary authority of new york in the
last resort may with truth be said to
reside in its senate
if the plan of the convention be in this
respect chargeable with a departure from
the celebrated maxim which has been so
often mentioned and seems to be so
little understood how much more culpable
must be the constitution of new york
in that of new jersey also the final
judiciary authority is in a branch of
the legislature in new hampshire
massachusetts pennsylvania and south
carolina one branch of the legislature
is the court for the trial of
impeachments
a second objection to the senate as a
court of impeachment is that it
contributes to an undue accumulation of
power in that body tending to give to
the government a countenance too
aristocratic the senate it is observed
is to have concurrent authority with the
executive in the formation of treaties
and in the appointment to offices
if say the objectors to these
prerogatives is added that of deciding
in all cases of impeachment it will give
a decided predominancy to senatorial
influence
to an objection so little precise in
itself it is not easy to find a very
precise answer
where is the measure of criterion to
which we can appeal for determining what
will give the senate too much too little
or barely the proper degree of influence
will it not be more safe as well as more
simple to dismiss such vague and
uncertain calculations to examine each
power by itself and to decide on general
principles where it may be deposited
with most advantage and least
inconvenience
if we take this course it will lead to a
more intelligible if not to a more
certain result the disposition of the
power of making treaties which has
obtained in the plan of the convention
will then if i mistake not appear to be
fully justified by the considerations
stated in a former number and by others
which will occur under the next head of
our inquiries
the expediency of the junction of the
senate with the executive in the power
of appointing two offices will i trust
be placed in a light not less
satisfactory in the disquisitions under
the same head and i flatter myself the
observations in my last paper must have
gone no inconsiderable way towards
proving that it was not easy if
practicable to find a more fit
receptacle for the power of determining
impeachments than that which has been
chosen
if this be truly the case the
hypothetical dread of the two great
weight of the senate ought to be
discarded from our reasonings but this
hypothesis such as it is has already
been refuted in the remarks applied to
the duration in office prescribed for
the senators
it was by them shown as well on the
credit of historical examples as from
the reason of the thing that the most
popular branch of every government
partaking of the republican genius by
being generally the favorite of the
people will be as generally a full match
if not an overmatch for every other
member of the government
but independent of this most active and
operative principle to secure the
equilibrium of the national house of
representatives the plan of the
convention has provided in its favor
several important counterpoises to the
additional authorities to be conferred
upon the senate
the exclusive privilege of originating
money bills will belong to the house of
representatives
the same house will possess the sole
right of instituting impeachments
is not this a complete counterbalance to
that of determining them the same house
will be the umpire in all elections of
the president which do not unite the
suffrages of a majority of the whole
number of electors a case which it
cannot be doubted will sometimes if not
frequently happen
the constant possibility of the thing
must be a fruitful source of influence
to that body the more it is contemplated
the more important will appear this
ultimate though contingent power of
deciding the competitions of the most
illustrious citizens of the union for
the first office in it
it would not perhaps be rash to predict
that as a mean of influence it will be
found to outweigh all the peculiar
attributes of the senate
a third objection to the senate as a
court of impeachments is drawn from the
agency they are to have in the
appointments to office
it is imagined that they would be two
indulgent judges of the conduct of men
in whose official creation they had
participated
the principle of this objection would
condemn a practice which is to be seen
in all the state governments if not in
all the governments with which we are
acquainted i mean that of rendering
those who hold offices during pleasure
dependent on the pleasure of those who
appoint them with equal plausibility
might it be alleged in this case that
the favoritism of the latter would
always be an asylum for the misbehavior
of the former
but that practice in contradiction to
this principle proceeds upon the
presumption that the responsibility of
those who appoint for the fitness and
competency of the persons on whom they
bestow their choice and the interest
they will have in the respectable and
prosperous administration of affairs
will inspire a sufficient disposition to
dismiss from a sharon at all such who by
their conduct shall have proved
themselves unworthy of the confidence
reposed in them
though facts may not always correspond
with this assumption yet if it be in the
main just it must destroy the
supposition that the senate who will
merely sanction the choice of the
executive should feel a bias towards the
objects of that choice strong enough to
blind them to the evidence of guilt so
extraordinary as to have induced the
representatives of the nation to become
its accusers
if any further arguments were necessary
to evince the improbability of such a
bias it might be found in the nature of
the agency of the senate in the business
of appointments
it will be the office of the president
to nominate and with the advice and
consent of the senate to appoint
there will of course be no exertion of
choice on the part of the senate they
may defeat one choice of the executive
and oblige him to make another but they
cannot themselves choose they can only
ratify or reject the choice of the
president
they might even entertain a preference
to some other person at the very moment
they were assenting to the one proposed
because there might be no positive
ground of opposition to him and they
could not be sure if they withheld their
ascent that the subsequent nomination
would fall upon their own favorite or
upon any other person in their
estimation more meritorious than the one
rejected
thus it could hardly happen that the
majority of the senate would feel any
other complacency towards the object of
an appointment than such as the
appearances of merit might inspire and
the proofs of the want of it destroy
a fourth objection to the senate in the
capacity of a court of impeachments is
derived from its union with the
executive in the power of making
treaties
this it has been said would constitute
the senators their own judges in every
case of a corrupt or perfidious
execution of that trust
after having combined with the executive
and betraying the interests of the
nation in a ruinous treaty what prospect
it is asked would there be of being made
to suffer the punishment they would
deserve when they were themselves to
decide upon the accusation brought
against them for the treachery of which
they have been guilty
this objection has been circulated with
more earnestness and with greater show
of reason than any other which has
appeared against this part of the plan
and yet i am deceived if it does not
rest upon an erroneous foundation
the security essentially intended by the
constitution against corruption and
treachery in the formation of treaties
is to be sought for in the numbers and
characters of those who are to make them
the joint agency of the chief magistrate
of the union and of two-thirds of the
members of a body selected by the
collective wisdom of the legislatures of
the several states is designed to be the
pledge for their fidelity of the
national councils in this particular
the convention might with propriety have
meditated the punishment of the
executive for a deviation from the
instructions of the senate or a want of
integrity in the conduct of the
negotiations committed to him they might
also have had in view the punishment of
a few leading individuals in the senate
who should have prostituted their
influence in that body as the mercenary
instruments of foreign corruption but
they could not with more or with equal
propriety have contemplated the
impeachment and punishment of two-thirds
of the senate consenting to an improper
treaty then a majority of that or of the
other branch of the national legislature
consenting to a pernicious or
unconstitutional law a principle which i
believe has never been admitted into any
government
how in fact could a majority in the
house of representatives impeach
themselves
not better it is evident than two-thirds
of the senate might try themselves and
yet what reason is there that a majority
of the house of representatives
sacrificing the interests of the society
by an unjust and tyrannical act of
legislation should escape with impunity
more than two-thirds of the senate
sacrificing the same interests in an
injurious treaty with a foreign power
the truth is that in all such cases it
is essential to the freedom and to the
necessary independence of the
deliberations of the body that the
members of it should be exempt from
punishments for acts done in a
collective capacity and the security to
the society must depend on the care
which is taken to confide the trust to
proper hands to make it their interest
to execute it with fidelity and to make
it as difficult as possible for them to
combine in any interest opposite to that
of the public good
so far as might concern the misbehavior
of the executive in perverting the
instructions of contravening the views
of the senate we need not be
apprehensive of the want of a
disposition in that body to punish the
abuse of their confidence or to
vindicate their own authority we may
thus far count upon their pride if not
upon their virtue and so far even as
might concern the corruption of leading
members by whose arts and influence the
majority may have been envigoled into
measures odious to the community if the
proofs of that corruption should be
satisfactory the usual propensity of
human nature will warrant us in
concluding that there would be commonly
no defective inclination in the body to
divert the public resentment from
themselves by already sacrifice of the
authors of their mismanagement and
disgrace
publius